# 📚 The Agatha Christie Oeuvre 📚

## Background
I started out with these datasets intending to participate in [DataFamCon's January 2023 project](https://data.world/datafam-con/january-2023-dame-agatha-christie). As I explored, I became more curious about Christie's bibliography and life, so I did some research. I discovered some inconsistencies in the original data I wanted to correct, and some new data I wanted to add.

The datasets in this project contain all of Agatha Christie's published [novels](datasets/literature/christie/Christie_novels.csv), [short stories](datasets/literature/christie/Christie_stories.csv), and [short story collections](datasets/literature/christie/Christie_short_story_collections.csv) through 1997. The [titles](datasets/literature/christie/Christie_titles.csv) dataset contains novels, stories, and collections all in one file for easier analysis.

If you find any errors or updated data, please create an issue. If you have methodology-related or other project-related questions, please [email me](mailto:nicoledesignsdata@pm.me). 

## Notes
The data include all of Christie's novels and short stories published in short story collections. The title types included in the dataset are novel, short story collection, and short story. There is one exception--Black Coffee, a play which was "novelized" in 1998 by Charles Osborne with the authorization of the Christie estate (and contains a murder by poison, so I was interested in it). This dataset does not include other plays or poetry--both of which Christie found time to write, amazingly!

Short story collections published after _While the Light Lasts and Other Stories_ (1997) were not included because later collections do not add any new work, There's one noteable exception--_The Last Seance: Tales of the Supernatural_ (2019). It includes the story "The Wife of the Kenite", which is believed to be Agatha Christie's first-ever published short story. (It was published in the magazine _Home: An Australian Quarterly_ in 1922.) This is the first time it was published in a book of stories, so the title is included in the data.

The "year of first publication" of a novel or of a short story in a collection is the year it was first published in either the U.S. or the U.K., whichever was earllier. (Please note, many short stories were published in magazines prior to publication in a short story collection.) With a tiny number of exceptions, no more than a year separates the publication dates in the U.S. and the U.K. In some cases, a title was published in the U.K. earlier; in others, it was published in the U.S. earlier. The vast majority of titles were published in the two countries during the same calendar year. (See the [DataFamCon dataset](https://data.world/datafam-con/january-2023-dame-agatha-christie/workspace/file?filename=Agatha+Christie+Bibliography.xlsx) if you'd like to have the years of publication for both countries.)

## Characters and series
Agatha Christie created many recurring characters, not just the ones represented in the "series" columns. For the purposes of the data. the titles are designated part of a "series" if her [estate's website](https://www.agathachristie.com/) defines them as a "character". This field generally contains the name of the detective(s). This deference to her estate's classifications means a character like Ariadne Oliver is a "series" while Captain Arthur Hastings, arguably a more major character, is not. Superintendent Battle "stars" in four different novels, but in order to preserve my sanity I decided to go with the estate website's designations whether I agreed or not. In the case of books written under the pseudonym Mary Westmacott, that name is the name of the series in this dataset (and in DataFamCon's).

### Racism
I want to acknowledge Christie's racism and the racism of a number of her characters. She made many positive contributions to popular literature, but her views on race were abhorrent and unacceptable. Of course, her publishers and those who purchased her work were/are complicit to varying degrees. The main reason I make a point to bring this up is because the novel [And Then There Were None](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/And_Then_There_Were_None) was originally titled _Ten Little N------_ in the United Kingdom, **and, bafflingly, the title was not changed until 1985**. The US edition was released in January 1940 with the title _And Then There Were None_, then sold under the--also obviously racist--title _Ten Little Indians_ between 1964 and 1986.
